Tyler Fisher: Hello, all right, start over for the stream.
Hello, I'm Tyler Fisher.
I make a project called SIL, which is a client on
top of the blue sky post lexicon that aggregates
the top links in your network.
It's a unique client experience that nothing else in the atmosphere
offers right now.
And I think we need more unique types of clients.
So I'm going to talk about how we can achieve that
today.
Last year, I moved to Harlem, a small city in the Netherlands.
At the center of the city, we have the Hrult
enmarkt, a large public plaza that is overlooked by the
Sint Babelkerk, the giant church.
It's a grand plaza that on the weekends turns into
a public square for local vendors.
But at any time during the week, it's a lovely place
to be.
It's quiet, safe, comfortable.
You'll also notice in this photo, it's car free.
The Netherlands is famous for its pedestrian and bicycle infrastructure.
But it wasn't always this way.
The Hrultenmarkt in the 1960s was more
of a parking lot and a road and a traffic circle going
through it.
When visitors visit the Hrultenmarkt today, they tend
to think of it as it's always been this way.
This is an ancient public square that's been this way since
the 1300s.
But it's not true.
The Hrultenmarkt was transformed as a result of
sustained protest and community engagement in Harlem during the 1960s and
70s to rip out the roads, rip out the parking, and
make it a pedestrianized plaza.
This got me thinking about how cities transform to places that are
designed more for people and what we can learn from walkable
cities about transforming digital spaces.
Ultimately, walkable cities are about getting people to walk or take
some other form of mobility to their destination instead of driving a
car.
The American city planner, Jeff Speck, gave a talk in 2013
about building walkable cities.
He says that a walk has to offer four things for somebody
to walk or take some other form of mobility instead of drive.
And I saw for these four things simultaneously.
There needs to be a proper reason to walk.
The walk has to be safe and feel safe.
The walk has to be comfortable.
And the walk has to be interesting.
I, like many of you, have been thinking about how do we
grow the atmosphere.
Building the atmosphere is an infrastructural change to the internet
on the level of transforming a city from one that is car-
centric to one that is person-centric.
So in thinking about this problem, I found myself revisiting Spe
ck's theory, but for the atmosphere.
There needs to be a proper reason to join the atmosphere.
The atmosphere has to be safe and feel safe.
The atmosphere has to be comfortable.
And the atmosphere has to be interesting.
We can break this theory into four parts.
Purpose, a proper reason to join the atmosphere.
Safety, the atmosphere has to be safe and feel safe.
Comfort, the atmosphere has to be comfortable.
And interest, the atmosphere has to be interesting.
I'd like to propose this four-component framing as a
structure for how we think about building atmospheric clients.
In this talk, I'm going to walk through each of these
four components and what they mean for client design.
I'll talk about how I think about them in my own
projects and offer some inspiration from elsewhere in the atmosphere that I
think do some of these things particularly well and discuss what opportunities
I see for us to further atmospheric clients in these four directions.
Let's start with purpose.
Speck's original theory describes us as having a proper reason
to walk.
For this, he means having a destination in mind.
For a walkable city, you have to have schools and doctors,
restaurants, bars, grocery stores, everything you need within walking distance.
We're all here building new apps, new experiences, trying to ent
ice people to join the open social web.
But why would they?
Often we lead with pitches about dated sovereignty, privacy, openness, and while
these are critical features, it's why we're all here.
They should be a given for atmospheric applications.
People need more purpose than that.
It's not enough to build the pedestrianized streets of the
internet.
They have to go somewhere.
The inability to convince people to join new social networks is a
long study problem.
Switching costs are real.
People won't move unless their network has already moved.
We can't solve this problem overnight.
What's exciting about AT Proto is the opportunities offered by
the PDS.
There have been over 40 million signups for Blue Sky so
far, each with their own PDS.
Each of those already have an account with your app too.
But if you're offering your own experience and your own le
xicon separate from the Blue Sky experience, this is somewhat cold
comfort.
40 million people can sign into your app, but if there is
no real content and their people aren't on your lexic
ons yet, there's not going to be much for them to
engage with.
So how can we leverage the Blue Sky existing network, but offer
new experiences that offer new motivations to join the atmosphere?
One option is to build clients on top of the existing le
xicons, but offer new experiences.
And that's what I've done with Sill, my link
aggregation client that is built on top of Blue Sky and
Mastodon.
Sill reads your following timeline, finds the most popular links in
your network, and offers you a different picture of your feed by
rank ordering the most popular links in your network.
It's most common use case for people is as a news
reader.
Typically, the most commonly shared URLs are news stories.
Many people use social media for news, and Sill offers them
an optimized way to do so.
This is a new experience built on top of an existing le
xicon.
But Sill's read-only.
What if you wanted to offer a whole new social experience without
having to bootstrap a whole new lexicon?
Sebastian Vogelsang's Flashes offers a really compelling concept
here.
It's a photo sharing app akin to Instagram, but it uses
the Blue Sky Post lexicon as its root.
But rather than limit itself to the limitations of the Post le
xicon in terms of photo sharing, it adds sidecar records
on top of the Blue Sky Post so that in the Fl
ashes app you get a more full photo sharing experience.
But Blue Sky users can still see and interact with those posts,
so you're immediately getting the benefit of being on the atmosphere
while still offering a new experience.
So now the atmosphere as a whole has two separate experiences to
offer people, microblogging, and photo sharing, and they're seamlessly
connected, letting everyone take advantage of the increasingly growing social graph.
As the atmosphere grows, more lexicons will get adopted, offering
more opportunities for extension, remixing, and combination from the client experience.
The community developing around standard outside is bearing a ton of fruit
here.
In the long form space, I would love to see more work
around premium news reading experiences.
There's both a supply and demand problem here of getting news
onto protocol and getting readers to understand that there is news on
the protocol.
I'm going to talk more about news on ATProto
at a panel tomorrow at 10 a.
m.
if you want to hear me talk more about that specifically.
But back to Speck's theory, he says that Walk must
be safe and feel safe.
This phrasing is specific.
There are, in fact, two related things here: being safe and feeling
safe.
It's an important distinction and one we have to think about
as we design digital spaces.
When you first talk about safety in digital spaces, the first thing
you're going to think of is content moderation.
I have no personal experience with content moderation.
It's not something I do instill beyond allowing people to
mute words and domains and accounts.
I'm just not an expert, so I'm not going to
say much about content moderation today, and I'd rather point you
to the experts in the space.
Black Sky just released Acorn, which is a community moderation tool
that they built with prioritizing the health of the moderators.
And I think that's a really awesome approach.
The team at Roost has released Osprey, which is
a more automated approach to dealing with abuse on social media and
automating that moderation burden.
And then research by Aaron Kassane and Darius Kaz
emi from a few years ago.
They did research on moderation in the Fediverse and composable
moderation.
It is about the Fediverse, but I think it offers a
ton of lessons as we think about this in the atmosphere as
well.
I want to tackle safety from a different angle, which is how
can our social media clients encourage healthier social media habits?
After all, even in a well-moderated network, we can
become addicted.
When the news is bad, we can fall prey to doom scrolling.
Even with reverse chronological timelines or algorithmic timelines, the context
collapse of different topics matched together can overwhelm and confuse us.
With Sill, I want to find solutions to these problems.
By default, Sill aggregates to the top links in your
network over 24 hours.
So if you leave it at that default, Sill doesn't
actually change very much throughout the day.
And this is actually a good thing if your primary use case
for social media is reading news.
Your network will surface the news that matters.
And once it reaches you, there's going to be a ton
of context from your network helping you process it, helping you understand
it.
As the story develops, you don't need to continue scrolling your
timeline where only every tenth post is actually the thing you're
trying to learn about right now.
Sill groups it all together, keeping your mind focused and allowing
you to read the story and grapple with its ramifications
without jumping to another topic and switching contexts.
Sill's -- these tactics are working with Sill's users
who regularly report that it's helping them use social media less
while still staying engaged.
David Crespo says he stays logged out of Blue Sky
on his phone and only uses Sill on his phone.
Robinson Meyer says he can dip in and out throughout the day.
David Ziff says if you want to use Blue Sky to
follow the news but you find feeds overwhelming, Sill is a
good alternative to that.
This is giving users a lever of control over their experience, and
this contributes to them feeling safe in the atmosphere.
What other modalities can we offer in the atmosphere that offer
a more controlled experience over social media?
I really love Anasota, which turns Blue Sky into a
card swipe-based experience and layers on like a moth collecting
game and all kinds of really neat artistic approaches to social media.
It also has similar motivations to Sill of calm and focus
rather than the real-time drip feed of social media, traditional social
media design.
It has a stamina meter, so if you swipe too much, it
tells you you got to stop, you're out of stamina.
I think it's really brilliant and offers a ton of things
to learn.
Overall, how else can we help users to leverage the collective intelligence
of their networks without forcing them into the same tired designs that
we've been using for social media for the last two decades?
We've spent enough time with both chronological timelines and algorithm
ic timelines to know the problems well, so it's time to
move beyond these and offer new experiences for people that give them
control and help them feel safe in the atmosphere.
Back to our walkable cities analogy, Speck says the walk
has to be comfortable.
In the physical space, that can mean quiet roads, accessible crosswalk
s, well-paid paths.
In the digital space, I think about comfort as meeting people where
they are, as joining the atmosphere should not require a downgrade
to their user experience, and this is a really tall task.
We're going to have to stretch ourselves.
Many of us, myself included, are believers in the web over native
apps, but it's undeniable that users prefer and expect
native apps, especially on their phones.
With sale, the number one question I get when I tell people
less online than me about it is, how do I get it
in the app store?
It's a website.
I say, just put it in your web browser, sale.
social.
At that point, I lose a lot of people.
They might try it once while I'm there in the room
with them.
If I see them a week later, I ask them how it
's going, and they haven't gone back.
They don't think about it.
They're not in the web browser that way.
I'd show them how you can add it to your home
screen.
SIL is a progressive web app, but after walking through that
menu diving and explaining the differences between progressive web apps and native
apps, I've already lost them.
They just want to be able to install it from the app
store.
So I built an iOS app for SIL that's now
in testing, and if you want to get on the test flight,
here's the QR code.
I hope to build an Android app after I get through the
launch process at the iOS app.
Over half of SIL's web traffic comes from iOS users,
so that's why I started with iOS.
And begrudgingly, I actually do now see how a
fully native app for SIL offers some real benefits for those
users.
With deep OS integration, I can offer push notifications.
This takes SIL's notification feature that already existed to its
natural conclusion, right?
Now SIL can tell you, based on parameters you define, S
IL can send you a push notification when news is emerging in
your network, and it can find you when it happens.
Sorry, I lost myself.
It can offer widgets, giving you a quick at-a-glance
view of the top link in your network without ever having to
really even open the app.
I can offer a native share target.
SIL also does bookmarking.
So with the native share target, you can bookmark a link
from anywhere you experience it within the operating system.
It is currently in beta, and you can, yeah, join the Tesla
if you would like, and let me know how it goes.
I'd love your feedback.
For all of big tech's faults and misalignments,
they offer a comfortable experience to users.
They employ legions of people to focus exclusively on user experience,
and they do it on every platform.
Web, iOS, Android, and more.
Many of us in the atmosphere, myself included, our founders, our solo
founders, or small teams.
Somehow we have to deliver on better user experiences for people with
far fewer resources.
But here's our advantage.
For all big tech's resources, to throw at user experience, they
often throw them at misaligned ends, misaligned with
the interest of the everyday user.
If we as a community can stay aligned on centering user
needs and furthering the vision that we all have of a
better internet, we can collectively offer a better experience than our competition.
I'm inspired by the interoperability story offered by Sem
ble and Margin.
Semble is a sense-making tool letting you collect collections of
bookmarks and blue sky posts and other things around the web.
And you can organize them into various collections.
You can do that individually.
You can do that in a public collection together with people in
the atmosphere.
Margin is an annotation layer for the web where you add
comments and annotations to any web page and save that annotation
to your PDS.
They're working together so that you can -- your bookmarks from
either Margin or Semble both work within both tools as
you're using them.
So that allows Semble to focus on where its innovation is
in the shared collections and organizational tools.
And Margin can focus on its innovation of being able to
annotate anything on the web.
But they all work together and they make each other better.
And it's not a competitive experience.
It's a collaborative experience.
We need more shared infrastructure in order to pull things off like
this.
Depending on your use case, it could be really hard to mix
and match lexicons in the atmosphere right now, especially if
one of the lexons you want to use is a
blue sky one.
Now you're talking about indexing terabytes of data if
you want a full network backfill.
So I love things like the microcosm set of tools
offer a ton of really easy ways for people to jump in
and pull different records from throughout the atmosphere.
I'd like to see more tools that offer more use cases.
Something I'd really love to see is a network-wide app
view that's designed for aggregative workloads, by which I mean,
you know, group by the types of fundamentally database queries that S
IL is doing, right?
Grouping by link, grouping by tangled star.
You can find links within leaflet docs, standard site docs.
I think it opens up a ton of interesting opportunities for experiences
that collect the whole atmosphere and not just focus on one app
experience.
Our last component, interest, is maybe the most surprising when you think
about walkable cities for specs components.
But for the atmosphere, I think it's probably the most obvious
one, right?
We have to build into interesting things.
We're competing with the whole internet for everybody's time and
we have to win.
What sticks out to me when I think about making interesting things
around the atmosphere is they have to be interesting immediately.
This is a place where I think the client experience can do
a lot of work, even if you're not interested in developing
new lexicons.
But to do it right is going to take some coordinated effort.
Let's use SIL as an example of what I mean.
With SIL, I've been thinking about how to onboard people
into the atmosphere if they don't already have a PDS.
And I want to point them in the direction of trustworthy news
that matches their needs and interests.
Today's SIL only really works if you've invested time
in building your own network and your following graph so that it
is a trusted network of information that you'd like.
For people in this room, that's probably pretty easy to do.
But for new users, that's a really tough hurdle to climb.
People need help finding people.
And while it had some flaws, one of, I think, the key
parts of growth of Blue Sky's 2024 post-election growth
was the starter pack.
And it was received well enough that the competition copied it.
Meta has starter packs and threads.
Blue Sky's other competitive edge is custom fees and algorithmic
choice.
Combining these two things, we can bootstrap a user
's network based on their interests rather quickly.
This is not live in SIL yet.
I haven't started building.
But here's how I see a SIL possible onboarding
experience working.
Users without an atmosphere account can register with a PDS.
SIL doesn't need to run that PDS.
I don't want to run a PDS.
But I'm open to partnering with anybody who is operating a
PDS and thinks something like this would be interesting to host
new users.
And I'd especially love if it wasn't Blue Sky so
that we can further the decentralization story of the atmosphere at
the same time.
After they register with the PDS, they can come back to
SIL and tell SIL a bit about what publications they
read, what topics they're interested in.
And through a combination of starter packs lists and custom feeds, they
can immediately bootstrap their graph.
And then SIL is ready and useful on day one as
soon as they finish that process.
And they can go over to the Blue Sky app or whatever
other client.
And it's already set up and ready to go.
But maybe you see the problem with this idea.
It requires maintaining a complex set of feeds, lists, and starter packs.
Keeping all those maintained over time as people leave and join the
network, it would become my full-time job if I was going
to do that alone.
I wouldn't be able to work on the app.
I would just work on maintaining feeds.
So making sense of the Blue Sky Social Graph has many uses
for many applications.
So this is something I think we could maybe take a collective
approach to and trying to find the bubbles that exist already.
I know there's been some mapping projects that people have done,
and I wonder if we can build on top of those to
automate some starter packs and some feeds and point people in the
right direction as soon as they get started.
Sports, I think, offer a really unique opportunity here.
A lot of Blue Sky, my understanding is a lot of Blue
Sky's post-2024 growth has come from sports.
Usage tends to peak around major American sporting events like the
World Series and Super Bowl.
But sports are also a place where X and other social networks
maintain a strong foothold.
So how can we use community-driven feeds and starter packs to
easily onboard people with the already vibrant sports network that Blue Sky
has?
And how might we use those networks to encourage activity and the
atmosphere overall?
I can imagine onboarding clients that ask you what's your
favorite team and then just setting up your graph immediately based on
your favorite teams and favorite leagues.
Transforming the internet from the walled gardens of Web 2.
0 to the openness of the atmosphere promises is no smaller an
effort than transforming a city from one centered around the car to
one centered around the person.
Just last week, Paris elected a new mayor after 12 years of
socialist mayor and Hidalgo.
Mayor Hidalgo's reign ushered in a sle
w of changes.
Paris now has a bigger bike network than Amsterdam, thousands of new
pedestrianized streets, and a whole new public transit line that came
about around the Olympics.
While politically controversial at the time, Hidalgo spent 12 years
in office making changes that made Paris more walkable.
This year, she chose not to run for a third term.
So Paris had the opportunity to maybe reset if they didn't
like these changes.
They elected Emmanuel Gregoire, who was her deputy mayor for
six years and fellow member of the socialist party.
The city was given an opportunity to vote for a similar party
program and they took it.
I believe that once people experience the atmosphere and everything it can
offer, they're going to choose it again and again and again,
but only if we nail the client experience.
When you're designing a client experience, you can use just four
principles to round out the implementation: purpose, safety, comfort, and interest.
Thank you.
Which of the four do you think is the most
important to you for sale?
Yeah.
For me, the most important is safety and the feel safe thing.
I think people get a lot of value out of having a
different, calmer, controlled experience and not have to feel like they
have to do and scroll to keep up with the news.
Yeah, so I was interested in your comment about we need to
go beyond the theme.
I feel like a lot of the talks today have really been
focused around the humanistic elements of the technology and understanding the
users and meeting them where they are and not saying just for
granted about that experience.
I wonder how do you think about balancing trying to push new
paradigms onto users with kind of leaving them where they
are, understanding their ideas, like, always that were very popular.
And what do you mean, you're paternalistic about, like,
no, I know a better way to do this or whatever.
Yeah.
No, that's a really good point.
I loved the -- and to rephrase for the stream, to
summarize your question, how do we design new experience while not being
paternalistic about it and just saying, "We know better.
Here's a new design." There was a great session on Thursday
about user research that -- I don't know if anybody in this --
I don't know if any people in this room were the
group that ran it.
I don't think so.
But it was really excellent and was a reminder to me that
we should be basing a lot of our work in user
research and understanding user needs directly by talking to them.
It was a great opportunity to do it in the room there.
As a solo founder, I sometimes find it hard to find the
time for that kind of thing.
But again, maybe it's another thing we can do collectively to
figure out what users really want and need from social experiences.
Yeah, I'm building an app called Flux.
It's, like, a client app.
And I've similarly been thinking about the sports thing since we
've seen that take off.
I'm kind of curious how -- like, how do you see that
happening with labelers or is there something else?
Yeah.
He asked about my idea about like a sports onboarding client.
My full pitch is basically three phases.
One is just sort of a sign-up onboarding service that
asks you, "What are your favorite teams?" And then this project I
thought about building would run some feeds maybe on Graze for
every team.
And I maintain, like, a set of Wikipedia scrapers or something
to get roster data and build the feeds off of those keywords.
And so it would set up your feeds and set up your,
you know, starter packs based on the league that you're interested
in.
Step two would be to then build actually a full client experience
on top of that specific for sports, right?
You could layer in live sports data.
You could layer in, like, highlights.
You know, do some, you know, fancy algorithm stuff to find, like,
the big highlight from the game you missed or something like that.
And then step three is, you know, going past the live experience,
something like fantasy sports on AT Proto or something like that.
Like, what sort of community building things can we do with a
specific niche like sports while still staying within the blue sky universe?
Yep.
The comment that, uh, I mean, I understand scientists as a real
ist.
Most of my colleagues are moving to the uh, I'm studying
climate and most of my scientists on blue sky.
Yeah.
So I think for the general public sports, for the whole subject
of scientists, the network is like, one particular group, blue sky.
Yeah.
Science, um, the comment was that, uh, the scientific community really has
moved to blue sky.
Uh, and I think that, that's an excellent example of like,
yeah.
Yeah, totally.
Right.
Uh, yeah.
Different groups have a different reason.
Um, should I, uh, move on?
How are we on time?
We have three more minutes.
Three minutes.
Any more questions?
If not, thank you.